1 Absence makes the heart grow fonder, First used in precisely this form by the British poet and playwright Thomas Haynes Bayly

in his song "le of Beauty (150) The sentiment can be traced back to the Roman poet Propertius (est century aC) 2 Men are best loved furthest off.

3. Absence diminishes little passions and Increases great ones. In the more elaborate form "Absence to love is like wind to a fire, it diminishes this s

a quotation from the French libertine Roger de Bussy-Rabutin. 

4 Absence sharpens love, presence strengthens it.

5 Far from eye, far from heart. 6 Salt water and absence wash away love.

7 Friends agree best at a distance.

8 Separation secures manifest friendship.

9 Long absence changes a friend. 

10 To dead men and absent there are no friends left.

12 Well kens the mouse when the cat's out of the house.

13 If the dog is not at home, he barks not. African proverb.

14 He that fears you present will hate you absent.


15 The absent are always in the wrong.

16 The absent are never without fault, nor the present without excuse. The earliest known citation in this form is by Benjamin Franklin (1736); however, there are many older variants.

17 The absent party is always to blame. 18 Never were the absent in the right.

10 if a person is away, his right is away. Moorish proverb.

20 Ite is guilty who is not at home.

21 Out of sight, out of mind.

23 Unminded, unmoaned. "Unmoaned" means "unlamented".

24 Unseen, unrued.

25 Long absent, soon forgotten.

26 Seldom seen, soon forgotten. 

27 The absent get farther off every day.

28 Absence is the mother of disillusion. 

29 The absent saint gets no candle.

30 Far folk fare best.

32 Far from court, far from care.

1 Misfortunes come of themselves.

2 An ill marriage is a spring of ill fortune..

3 Adversity makes a man wise, not rich. 

4 Trouble brings experience and experience brings wisdom.

5 The wind in one's face makes one wise. "The wind in one's face" implies adversity or difficulty.

7 Adversity makes strange bedfellows.

6 Misfortunes hasten age. Like proverb 

8 below, this implies that unlikely alliances are formed through com

8 Woes unite foes.

9 Misfortune makes foes of friends.

10 It is easy to bear the misfortunes of others.

11 Adversity is the touchstone of virtue.

12 Adversity comes with instruction in its hand.

13 Misfortunes tell us what fortune is. Like proverb 

14 below, this implies that good fortune can be better appreciated when has experienced misfortune.

14 No man better knows what good is than he who has endured evil. 

15 He that is down needs fear no fall.

A quotation from the shepherd boy's song in Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress (1684).

16 Ill luck is good for something.

17 Sweet are the uses of adversity. A quotation from Shakespeare's As You Like It (c. 1600).

18 What is worse than ill luck?

19 He gains enough whom fortune loses.

20 Misfortunes find their way even on the darkest night.

21 Misfortune comes to all men and most women. Chinese proverb.

22 There is a crook in the lot of every one. "Crook" here means "trial, affliction".

23 Misfortune is not that which can be avoided, but that which cannot.

24 Misfortune arrives on horseback but departs on foot. 25 Mischief comes by the pound and goes away by the ounce.

26 Ill comes in by ells, and goes out by inches. An "ell" was a former unit of length, used mainly to measure cloth; originally calculated from the length of a man's forearm (about 18 inches), it was later standardized at 45 inch

28 It never rains but it pours.

29 Of one ill come many.

30 Ill comes often on the back of worse.

31 An unhappy man's cart is eith to tumble. "Unhappy means "unlucky" and "eith to tumble" means "easy to betr plication is that an unfortunate person is most susceptible to further mid

32 Lightning never strikes twice in the same place.

1 Good counsel has no price. 

2 Good counsel never comes too late.

3 Good counsel never comes amiss. 
4 Good take heed does surely speed.

5 Take heed is a fair thing.

6 Advice is a stranger; if welcome he stays for the night; if not wel

7 Counsel is irksome, when the matter is past remedy.

8 When a thing is done, advice comes too late. 9 We may give advice, but we cannot give conduct.

10 Counsel is no command. 11 Take counsel only of your own head.

12 Though thou hast never so many counsellors, yet do not forsake the

13 A good scare is worth more to a man than good advice.

14 Counsel will make a man stick his own mare.

15 Ill counsel mars all.

16 While the discreet advise, the fool does his business.

17 Though old and wise, yet still advise. 18 There never came ill of good advisement.

19 He that will not be counselled, cannot be helped.

20 Counsel must be followed, not praised.

21 In vain he craves advice that will not follow it.

22 He was slain that had warning, not he that took it. 23 Advice when most needed is least heeded.

24 The first degree of folly is to hold one's self wise, the second to proles third to despise counsel.

25 Who will not be ruled by the rudder, must be ruled by the rock. Implies that those who will not be guided by advice and warning must learn from disas

ter. A nautical saying.

26 Write down the advice of him who loves you, though you like it not present.

27 In wiving and thriving a man should take counsel of all the world. That is, you cannot take too much advice in matters of marriage or commerce.

The need to be selective

28 Steer not after every mariner's direction.. 

29 Too much consulting confounds.

30 He that speers all opinions, comes ill speed.

31 Like counsellor, like counsel.

32 If you wish good advice, consult an old man.

33 Night is the mother of counsel.

Both this and proverb 34 below are ways of saying "sleep on it". Variants of the expres sion are found in Menander, Spenser, and Dryden.

34 The best advice is found on the pillow. 

35 Counsel is to be given by the wise, the remedy by the rich.

36 The healthful man can give counsel to the sick.

37 An enemy may chance to give good counsel.

38 If the counsel be good, no matter who gave it. 

39 A fool may give a wise man counsel.

40 The egg shows the hen the place where to hatch.

African proverb. The implication is that the advice of the young should not be desped

41 A woman's advice is no great thing, but he who won't take it is a fool.

42 Counsels in wine seldom prosper..

43 Counsel over cups is crazy. 

44 Advice whispered in the ear is not worth a tare

45 Advice whispered is worthless

46 Take the first advice of a woman

52 Don't teach your grandmother to suck eggs. Don't attempt to teach someone what he or she may reasonably be expected to m better than you. Variants of this curious expression include to spin eggs

ducks", and "to sup sour milk

53 Overhasty counsels are rarely prosperous. 
54 Anger and haste hinder good counsel.

35 The counsel thou wouldst have another keep, first keep it thyself.

56 We have better counsel to give than to take.

57 Nothing is given so freely as advice.

58 The land is never void of counsellors. 

59 He that thatches his house with turds shall have more teachers than reachers Implies that someone who puts himself in an unpleasant situation through his own foly
must expect people to be more ready with advice than practical assistance. 

60 Bachelors' wives and maids' children are well taught. 
51 He that has no children brings them up well.

52 Every man can rule a shrew save he that has her. 

3 He that has no wife, beats her oft.

4 Ambition makes people diligent. Poor by condition, rich by ambition.

5 He who aims at the moon may hit the top of a tree; he who aims at the top

of a tree is unlikely to get off the ground. He that stays in the valley, shall never get over the hill.

6 Nothing crave, nothing have. Nothing seek, nothing find.

14 Ambition loses many a man.

15 He who opens his heart to ambition closes it to repose. 16 Every ambitious man is a captive and every covetous one a pauper

17 Desire has no rest (Arabic proverb)

18 The best is the enemy of the good.

Implies that by continually striving for the best one may waste good opportunties. The earliest recorded use is by Voltaire (79) but the expression is probably of older orig The saying is sometimes reversed to give the opposite meaning: see co

19 Better sit still than rise and fall.

20 Hasty climbers have sudden falls

21 High places have their precipices. 

22 The higher the mountain the greater descent.

23 Hew not too high lest the chips fall in thine eye The allusion is to chopping down a tree; if blows are struck above head height chips may

blind the hewer, with potentially dangerous consequences 

24 in a great river, great fish are found; but take heed lest you be drowned

25 The ant had wings to her hurt. A warning against aspiring to higher positions than one is equipped to cope with

20 Better be first in a village than second at Rome A saying attributed to Julius Caesar in Plutarchy's Lives (st century AD).

27 Better be the head of a dog than the tall of a lion Variants substitute "fox", "mouse", or "izard" for "dog". Others substitute "Hurgeon", or "yeomanry. gentry" for "dog. lon

38 Better ride on an ass that carries me than a horse that throws me

29 Seek that which may be found.

3 Anger makes a rich man hated, and a poor man comed

6 Wrath killeth the foolish man

11 Anger has no eyes

12 When a man grows angry, his reason rides out. 

13 When wrath speaks, wisdom vells her face.

14 Anger begins with folly, and ends with repentance. 

15 When a man is angry, he cannot be in the right.

16 As is kindled by bellows, so is anger by words,

17 A hungry man is an angry man,

18 Patience provoked turns to fury

19 Short folk are soon angry For other expressions of this common folk belief see SMALL THINGS 42-43

Its duration

20 Anger dies quickly with a good man. 

21 Anger is a short madness,

22 The anger is not warrantable that has seen two suns. 

23 He who slowly gets angry keeps his anger longer.

24 When angry, count a hundred.

25 Delay is the antidote of anger. 

26 If you be angry, you may turn the buckle of your belt behind you.

27 When meat is in, anger is out. 

28 A soft answer turneth away wrath.

29 Anger restrained is wisdom gained.

30 When you enter into a house, leave the anger ever at the door. 

31 He has wisdom at will, that with an angry heart can hold him still.

32 Let not the sun go down upon your wrath. A biblical quotation: Ephesians 4:26.

7 Wrath often consumes what goodness husbands.

8 Anger ends in cruelty. 

9 Take heed of the wrath of a mighty man, and the tumult of the people.

11 Anger has no eyes. Hindi proverb.

12 When a man grows angry, his reason rides out.

13 When wrath speaks, wisdom vells her face. 

14 Anger begins with folly, and ends with repentance.

15 When a man is angry, he cannot be in the right.

16 As fire is kindled by bellows, so is anger by words.

17 A hungry man is an angry man. 18 Patience provoked turns to fury.

19 Short folk are soon angry.

20 Anger dies quickly with a good man. 

21 Anger is a short madness.

22 The anger is not warrantable that has seen two suns.

23 He who slowly gets angry keeps his anger longer.

24 When angry, count a hundred.

25 Delay is the antidote of anger.

26 If you be angry, you may turn the buckle of your belt behind you.

The aim of turning one's belt is apparently to provide a harmless outlet for one's anger. 

27 When meat is in, anger is out.

28 A soft answer turneth away wrath. A biblical quotation: Proverbs 15:1.


29 Anger restrained is wisdom gained.. 

30 When you enter into a house, leave the anger ever at the door.

31 He has wisdom at will, that with an angry heart can hold him still.

32 Let not the sun go down upon your wrath. A biblical quotation: Ephesians 4:26.

33 Two things a man should never be angry at: what he can help, and what he cannot help. Implies that off anger is futile.

34 He that is angry without a cause, shall be pleased without amends.

1 Expectation is better than realization. 

2 Prospect is often better than possession.

3 Fear of death is worse than death itself.

4 Easter so longed for is gone in a day. 

5 It is better to travel hopefully than to arrive.

6 Don't count your chickens before they are hatched. The moral of "The Milkmaid and her Pail", one of the fables attributed to Aesop (6th cen

tury sc).

7 Don't sell the skin till you have caught the bear. The moral of La Fontaine's fable "The Bear and the Two Companions" (late 17th centu ry). This is probably the origin of the stock-market term "bear", meaning a dealer who

exploits a falling market by selling securities, etc., that he does not have in the expecta tion of buying them in at a lower rate.

8 First catch your hare.

10 Count not four, except you have them in a wallet.

11 Don't bargain for fish which are still in the water. Indian proverb.

12 It is ill fishing before the net. That is, before the net is drawn in.

13 Don't build the sty before the litter comes.

14 Boll not the pap before the child is born.

15 Don't spread the cloth till the pot begins to boil. 

16 Gut no fish till you get them.

17 Make not your sauce, before you have caught the fish.

18 Don't eat the calf in the cow's belly. 

19 It is ill prizing of green barley.

20 Do not halloo till you are out of the wood. Don't rejoice at extricating yourself from a difficult situation until you are sure that there

21 Do not triumph before the victory.

22 The opera Isn't over till the fat lady sings. A modem US proverb implying that something can't be considered over until an app priate climax has been reached. It has been attributed to a Texan sports editor, Dan

23 He laughs best who laughs last. 

24 He who laughs last, laughs longest.

25 There's many a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip. the legend of Ancaeus, king of lonia. In mockery of a prophecy that he would not live to A very ancient proverb, cited by several classical authors. It apparently originates from taste the wine from his vineyards, Ancaeus raised a goblet of the new wine to his lo However, before he could drink a drop he received a message that a wild boar was te ing up the vineyard; he immediately went to drive it away and was killed in the attempt. 26 Blessed is he who expects nothing, for he shall never be disappointed.
Cited as "the ninth beatitude" by Alexander Pope in a letter of 1725. 27 He that hopes not for good, fears not evil.

28 The unexpected always happens. 

29 Nothing is certain but the unforeseen.

1 Appearances are deceptive.

2 Things are not always what they seem. 

3 All that glitters is not gold.

4 All are not maidens that wear bare hair. A reference to the former fashion of virgins to go without hats.

5 It is not the beard that makes the philosopher.

6 If the beard were all, the goat might preach. 

7 It is not the gay coat that makes the gentleman.

6 The cowl does not make the monk. A cowl is the hooded garment distinctive to monks.

9. The face is no index to the heart. Another common proverb states the opposite: "The face is index to the heart (or mind)."

10 He that looks in a man's face knows not what money is in his purse.

11 All are not merry that dance lightly. 

12 They that are booted are not always ready. 

13 All Stuarts are not sib to the king.

43 An ape's an ape, a varlet's a varlet, though they be clad in silk or scarlet

"Scarlet" here signifies the ceremonial robe of a judge or other dignitary, Variants of saying can be traced back to Lucan (1st century AD). 

44 The filth under the white snow the sun discovers.

45 Fine dressing is a foul house swept before the doors. 

46 A whore in a fine dress is like a clean entry to a dirty house, 

47 A holy habit cleanses not a foul soul.

1 He that cannot ask, cannot live. 

2 A man may lose his goods for want of demanding them.

3 Bashfulness is an enemy to poverty. That is, bashfulness is a great disadvantage to a poor man.

4 Better to ask the way than go astray.

5 Ask and it shall be given you.

A biblical quotation: Matthew 7:7. 

6 Speak and speed, ask and have. 

7 He that demands misses not, unless his demands be foolish.

8 Question for question is all fair. 

9 Like question, like answer.

10 Ask a silly question and you'll get a silly answer.


11 Never answer a question until it is asked.

12 Ask no questions and hear no lles. Variants of this common saying appear in works by Goldsmith, Scott, and Kipling.

13 It is not every question that deserves an answer.

14 Every why has a wherefore.

15 He that asks faintly begs a denial. 

16 Shameful craving must have shameful nay.

17 A civil denial is better than a rude grant.

18 Delays are not denials.

19 Don't say 'No' till you are asked.

20 If you always say 'No', you'll never be married. 

21 'No, thank you', has lost many a good butter-cake. An old Lancashire saying.

22 Never refuse a good offer.

23 The money you refuse will never do you good. 24 Money refused loses its brightness.

1 Better to rule than be ruled by the rout. 

2 It is better to be the hammer than the anvil.

3 He who has the frying-pan In his hand turns it at will. 

4 He who holds the thread holds the ball.

5 Mickle power makes many enemies. "Mickle" means "much".

6 Out of office, out of danger.

7 It is ill putting a sword in a madman's hand.

8 Power corrupts.

A proverb based on the words of the British historian Lord Acton: "Power tends to cor rupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely" (from a letter of 1887). Acton continued "Great men are almost always bad men."

9 If you wish to know a man, give him authority.

10 Authority shows the man.

11 Mastery mows the meadows down. That is, those in authority get things done.

13 He that puts on a public gown, must put off a private person.

Implies that those in authority must not be influenced by private interests and affairs.

14 Caesar's wife must be above suspicion. "Caesar's wife" refers to any relative or close friend of a person in authority. The saying originates from Julius Caesar's action in divorcing his second wife Pompeia, whose name had been dragged into a scandalous court case. Although he accepted that she had done nothing wrong, Caesar considered his position compromised and insisted on a divorce. The story is told in Plutarch's Lives (1st century AD).

15 An army of stags led by a lion would be more formidable than one of lions

led by a stag. The saying, which implies that the strength of the leader is far more important than the strength of the army, can be traced back to Plutarch (1st century AD). Compare the well known description of Britain's World War I armies as "lions led by donkeys" (sometimes

attributed to the German general Erich Ludendorf).

16 No man can be a good ruler, unless he has first been ruled.

17 One must be a servant before one can be a master. 

18 Servants make the worst masters. 

19 He is not fit to command others, that cannot command himself.

20 He that is master of himself, will soon be master of others. 

21 Every man cannot be a master. 

22 He is the best general who makes the fewest mistakes.

23 Where every man is master, the world goes to wrack. "Wrack" means "collapse, destruction", as in "rack and ruin".

24 One master in a house is enough. 

25 There is no good accord, where every man would be a lord. 

26 That voyage never has luck where each one has a vote.

27 Where grooms and householders are all alike great, very disastrous will it be for the houses and all that dwell in them.. 

28 Every man's man had a man, and that made the Treve fall.

29 He that has a fellow-ruler, has an over-ruler.

1 Covetousness is the root of all evil. Variants substitute "money", "riches",

or "Idleness" for "covetousness"; the saying is based on 1 Timothy 6:10. See WEALTH: 29.

2 No mischief but a woman or a priest is at the bottom of it.

3 Mischief comes without calling for.

4 Weeds want no sowing.

5 He who does no good, does evil enough.

6 When the weasel and the cat make a marriage, it is a very ill presage.

7 He that does ill, hates the light.

8 He that lives not well one year, sorrows seven after.

9 Sin is the root of sorrow. Chinese proverb.

10 Who swims in sin shall sink in sorrow.

11 Sin plucks on sin.

12 He that has done ill once, will do it again..

13 One might as well be hanged for a sheep as for a lamb.

14 He that mischlef hatches, mischief catches.

15 They that sow the wind shall reap the whirlwind. Based on Hosea 8:7.

16 Vice is its own punishment, and sometimes its own cure.
 
17 A wicked man is his own hell.

18 An Ill life, an ill end.

19. He that lives wickedly can hardly die honestly.

21. The chart the better sport The more wicked, the more backy

24 Thaves and goes have the best hack, if they do but scape hanging 

25 The greater the sinner, the greater the saint

2 Wickes with beauty is the devil's hook baited

27 Never open the door to a little vice, lest a great one enter with it.

28 The wages of sin is death.

29 Every sin beings its punishment with it.

30 Where vice is, vengeance follows. 

31 Fear nothing but sin

32 It is a good world, but they are ill that are on it.

33 It is a wicked world, and we make part of it.

34 The world is full of knaves.

35 To fall into sin is human, to remain in sin is devilish.


36 A bad penny always turns up. A bad coin circulates fast because each new owner hastens to get rid of it, simila

reputable person is likely to tum up again when least wanted.

37 Some do amend when they cannot grow worse. 

38 A knave and a fool never take thought. 

39 The love of the wicked is more dangerous than their hatred. 

40 Show a good man his error, and he turns it to a virtue; but an ill, it do

41 Two false knaves need no broker.

42 Ill weeds grow apace.

43 The weeds overgrow the corn.

Implies that the bad outnumber the good.

44 Evil doers are evil dreaders.

45 The best remedy against an ill man, is much ground between.

46 He who sups with the devil should have a long spoon. Cited by Chaucer and Shakespeare. 

47 One hates not the person, but the vice.

49 The end justifies the means.

50 Never do evil that good may come of it.

51 Wrong has no warrant.

52 Wrong never comes right.

53 Two wrongs do not make a right.

54 Two blacks do not make

1 Beauty is only skin-deep. 

2 Beauty is only one layer.

3 Beauty may have fair leaves, yet bitter fruit.

4 Fair face, foul heart. 

5 The peacock has fair feathers, but foul feet.

6 There is many a fair thing full false.

7 Fair without, false within..

8 Beauty and honesty seldom agree.

9 Beauty and folly go often in company.

10 White silver draws black lines.

11 Beauty draws more than oxen. A more elaborate variant has "One hair of a woman draws more than a hundred oxen."

2 Beauty opens locked doors.

3 Beauty is eloquent even when silent. 

4 A good face is a letter of recommendation.

17 All cats are grey in the dark

18 Goodness is better than beauty 

19 Good fame is better than a good face.

20 Handsome is as handsome does.

21 Beauty without bounty avalls nought. 

22 A fair woman without virtue is like palled wine. "Palled" is an obsolete term describing wine that has become stale from exposure to the

23 Beauty won't make the pot boll. 

24 No one can live on beauty, but they can die for it.

25 Prettiness makes no pottage.

26 A poor beauty finds more lovers than husbands. 

27 Beauty is no inheritance. 

28 Beauty is potent but money is omnipotent.

29 Beauty fades like a flower.

30 Beauty is but a blossom.

31 The fairest flowers soonest fade. 32 The fairest rose at last is withered.

33 Grace will last, beauty will blast. 34 Prettiness dies first.

35 Beauty is in the eye of the beholder.

36 Fair is not fair, but that which pleases. 

37 A ship under sail, a man in complete armour, a woman with a great belly are

three of the handsomest sights.

38 If Jack's in love, he's no judge of Jill's beauty. 

39 The owl thinks her own young fairest. An allusion to one of the fables attributed to Aesop (6th century BC).

40 Health and galety foster beauty.

41 Health and wealth create beauty. 

42 A blithe heart makes a blooming visage.

3 The joy of the heart makes the face fair.

47. The smaller the giglet pes, the more to the pot the far the man, the more

as who has a tale wille needs more than two eyes

40 Please your eye and plagar your heart. 

30 A air wie and a toner castle breed quarrels

31 Pretty face, poce fane Chinese proved.

52 Beauty's sitter is vanity, and its daughter hast

53 A woman and a cherry are painted for their own harm As the attractive colour of a chery leads to its destruction, so does beauty (or mak

54 A bonny bride is soon buskit, and a short horse is soon wispit.

"Buk" means "adomed", "spit" means "rubbed down.

55 A good face needs no band, and a bad one deserves none.

56 Who is bon fair is born married.

57 A fair face cannot have a crabbed heart. 

38. An enemy to beauty is a foe to nature.

59 A thing of beauty is a joy forever


1 Everything must have a beginning. 

2 Everything has its seed.

3 No root, no fruit.

4 Rivers need a spring.

5 First Impressions are the most lasting.

6 The first blow is half the battle.

7 Every beginning is hard.

8 The first step is the hardest.

9 The greatest step is that out of doors.

11 A good beginning make a good ending

12 An beginning, an ending 13 Such beginning, such end.

74 Well I begun is half done


15 A beard well lathered is half shaved.

16 No good building without a good foundation.

13 Believing

Its sources

1 We soon believe what we desire.

2 Seeing is believing.

3 That which is easily done, is soon belleved. 

4 Men have greater faith in those things which they do not understand.

5 Believe well and have well. 6 He can who believes he can.

7 Faith will move mountains. An adaptation of Matthew 17:20.

8 Belief is better than investigation.

9 He that believes all, misses; he that believes nothing, misses.

10 Belleve nothing of what you hear, and only half of what you see. 

11 Of money, wit, and virtue, believe one-fourth of what you hear.

12 Believe no tales from an enemy's tongue.

13 Thinking is very far from knowing.

14 They that think none ill, are soonest beguiled. 

15 No man so wise but he may be deceived.

16 A fool belleves everything.

17 A fool and his money are soon parted.

18 If fools went not to market, bad wares would not be sold.

19 The more one knows, the less one believes. 

20 He that knows nothing, doubts nothing.

13 Breeding

27 Apond of care will nok pay an ounce of chib 28 Andred pounds of somos pas got one ounce of debt,

Sow will pay no debt

30 thanks gay net for a new debt 

31 Unpaid debes are given sis

es that for a borower the day of repayment always comes around to s Pay what you owe and you'll know what you're worth

34 Pay with the same dish you borrow Out of debt, out of danger 

36 Once paid never craved

My what you owe and you'll never again be pestered for it. 

3 Short reckonings make long friends. Short reckoning here means "prompt repayment of debts".

38 Death pays all debts

Combines the idea of death as repaying "the debt to nature" with the general principle that debts cannot be inherited 

1 Better unborn than unbred. 

2 The best bred have the best portion.

"Portion" here means "inheritance".

3 Birth is much, but breeding is more. 

4 Nurture is above nature.

Implies that breedings of more importance than inherited qualities. The formulation

"nature...nurture" is still common in debates about the relative importance of hereditary or environmental factors

6 Civility costs nothing

7 There is nothing lost by civility 

8 Courtesy is the inseparable companion of virtue.

9 Manners maketh man.

A saying associated with the English churchman William of Wykeham (1324-1404). It i

the motto of Wochester School and New College, Oxford, both of which he founded.

10 Manners make often fortunes.

11 Manners and money make a gentleman. 

12 Meat is much, but manners is better.

15 Breeding

13 Leave is light.

Impes that it is yenugh to ask "Teave, or permission, before doing something

14 After you is good manners 

15 It is not good manners to show your learning before ladies.

It was formerly considered impolite to use Latin or Greek in mixed company, as very few

women had been educated in these languages 16 Speak when you are spoken to

An edmonition to servants or children 

17 A well-bred youth neither speaks of himself, not, being spoken to, is silent.

18 Curiosity is ill manners in another house.

19 Do on the hill as you would do in the hall.

The ill-bred

20 It is an ill-bred dog that will beat a bitch. 

21 The higher the ape goes, the more he shows his tall.

22 Courtesy is cumbersome to them that ken it not. That is, good manners don't come naturally to those who are not used to polite society. A sarcastic "excuse" for someone who behaves discourteously.

23 Dogs bark as they are bred. 

24 Beware of breed. "Breed" here refers to the ill-bred.

25 Do not cast your pearls before swine.

A slight rephrasing of Matthew 7:6.

The gentry

26 Gentility is but ancient riches.

27 Gentility without ability is worse than plain beggary.

28 Gentry sent to market will not buy one bushel of corn.

Implies that noble blood alone is of no material value. 

29 Good blood makes bad puddings without groats or suet.

30 Nobility, without ability, is like a pudding wanting suet.. 

31 Great birth is a very poor dish at table.

32 The more noble, the more humble. 

33 Kind hearts are more than coronets. A quotation from Tennyson's "Lady Clara Vere de Vere" (1848). The phrase provided the

title of the Ealing film Kind Hearts and Coronets (1949). 

34 Better a good cow than a cow of good kind.

35 Virtue is the only true nobility.

36 He is noble that has noble conditions. 

37 He is a gentleman that has gentle conditions.

38 A gentleman will do like a gentleman

39 A gentleman without an estate is like a pudding without suet.

40 A thier passes for a gentleman when stealing has made him rich.

43 It is not the gay coat that makes the gentleman. 44 It takes three generations to make a gentleman.


43 The king can make a knight, but not a gentleman.
46 The Peerage is the Englishman's Bible. A reference to Burke's Peerage (1826), a directory of peers and their genealogy.

2 Building is a sweet impoverishing. 

3 Building and borrowing, a sack full of sorrowing.

4 Building and marrying of children are great wasters. 

5 The charges of building, and making of gardens are unknown.

6 Fools build houses, and wise men buy them. 7 Who borrows to build, builds to sell.
